This is Jacob's Research Journal. I'm Jacob Brooke. Today's deep
dive: W-W-D-C twenty twenty-six — what's actually coming June eighth.
Apple confirmed it two weeks ago: W-W-D-C twenty twenty-six runs
June eighth through the twelfth, with the keynote kicking off
Monday morning at Apple Park. On paper, it's the same
format we've seen since twenty twenty — mostly online, a
few thousand lottery winners in person, software betas by the
afternoon. But the stakes this year are genuinely different. Last
year, Apple spent W-W-D-C introducing Liquid Glass and playing catch-up
on A-I promises that had been piling up since the
original Apple Intelligence announcement at W-W-D-C twenty twenty-four. This year,
the company has to prove that the billions it's spending
on A-I infrastructure are producing something people actually want to
use. And the centerpiece of that argument has a name
you already know: Siri. I've spent the last week pulling
together every credible source I can find — Bloomberg's Mark
Gurman, Apple's own press materials, supply chain reporting, developer leaks,
and community speculation — to build the most complete picture
of what's coming. Let me walk you through it. Now
let's talk about the main event: Siri's second act. If
there's one story at W-W-D-C this year, it's Siri. And
for the first time in Siri's fifteen-year existence, there's real
reason to pay attention. In January, Apple and Google announced
a multi-year partnership to build the next generation of Apple
Foundation Models on Google's Gemini. Bloomberg's Gurman reported the deal
is worth roughly one billion dollars per year. Let that
sink in — that's not a licensing fee for a
chat widget. That's infrastructure-level commitment. Apple is rebuilding its A-I
backbone on Gemini, processed through its own Private Cloud Compute
infrastructure so the company can keep its privacy story intact.
The technical architecture is a two-tier system. Simple queries —
about forty percent of interactions — are handled entirely by
a three-billion-parameter on-device model running on A-eighteen Pro and M-four
chips, processing in under two hundred milliseconds without ever leaving
the device. Complex queries requiring L-L-M level reasoning get routed
to Apple's Private Cloud Compute servers, where Gemini models run
in hardware-isolated, stateless environments. Google provides the intelligence; Apple controls
the data pipeline. It's a clever arrangement that lets Apple
ship frontier A-I capability without abandoning its privacy positioning. But
the bigger reveal expected at W-W-D-C is the chatbot version
of Siri. According to MacRumors and multiple corroborating reports, Apple
is building a full conversational interface — think ChatGPT or
Claude — accessible via Siri's existing entry points: the wake
word, the side button, or typing. The chatbot will feature
persistent conversation history, web search, file analysis, image generation through
Image Playground, and what Apple has been internally calling world
knowledge capabilities. Here's a key detail worth calling out: Apple
plans to open Siri to third-party A-I providers in i-O-S
twenty-seven via an Extensions system in Settings. This ends OpenAI's
exclusive arrangement and lets users direct queries to Claude, Gemini,
Grok, and others — making Siri more of an A-I
router than a single model. That's a significant strategic shift.
There's also the on-device intelligence layer. Siri is gaining personal
context awareness — the ability to pull from your emails,
messages, files, and photos to answer questions like "show me
the files Eric sent me last week." Plus on-screen awareness,
where Siri can see and act on whatever you're looking
at. These features were originally promised for i-O-S eighteen and
have been in various stages of development since. W-W-D-C twenty
twenty-six is where they're supposed to actually ship. Now let's
move on to i-O-S twenty-seven — the Snow Leopard strategy.
Mark Gurman has been consistent on this one: i-O-S twenty-seven
is a Snow Leopard update. If you remember the Mac
O-S ten era, Snow Leopard followed the ambitious Leopard with
a release focused almost entirely on stability, performance, and cleaning
up technical debt. No flashy features. Just making everything work
better. That's exactly what i-O-S twenty-seven is shaping up to
be. After i-O-S twenty-six introduced the biggest visual redesign since
i-O-S seven with Liquid Glass, Apple's software engineers are reportedly
spending this cycle eradicating bugs, replacing old code, and optimizing
performance. The practical upshot: better battery life on older iPhones,
smoother animations, fewer crashes, faster app launches. The kind of
improvements that don't make for exciting keynote slides but make
your phone feel noticeably better to use. That said, there
are a few concrete feature additions worth tracking. Liquid Glass
refinements — the new design language is reportedly getting a
tuning pass, with MacRumors reporting a possible system-wide adjustment slider
that would let users control the intensity of the translucency
effects. If you've found Liquid Glass too busy, this could
be the answer. Foldable iPhone groundwork — i-O-S twenty-seven is
expected to include interfaces specifically designed for a larger foldable
screen — side-by-side app support, new sidebar functionality, form-factor-specific layouts.
The foldable iPhone itself isn't expected until the fall hardware
event, but the software will be previewed at W-W-D-C. And
there's a lower-confidence rumor about an A-I-powered Calendar app —
likely smart scheduling suggestions and natural language event creation powered
by Apple Intelligence. Now, for developers: Core A-I replaces Core
M-L. This one flew under the mainstream radar but it's
a big deal for the developer community. Apple is replacing
Core M-L with a new framework called Core A-I at
W-W-D-C twenty twenty-six. The naming shift from M-L to A-I
isn't just marketing — it signals a move from a
framework designed primarily for running predictive models to one that
supports conversational, generative, and agentic A-I systems. Core A-I is
reportedly designed to help developers integrate third-party A-I models into
their apps, with speculation that it may support the Model
Context Protocol — or M-C-P — as a standardized integration
layer. Core M-L isn't disappearing overnight — both frameworks will
coexist during a transition period — but the direction is
clear. Apple is building the plumbing for an ecosystem where
every app can be A-I-powered, not just the ones Apple
builds itself. Let's talk hardware at a software show. W-W-D-C
is a software event, but Apple has a habit of
slipping hardware announcements in. This year, the main candidates are:
Mac Studio with M-five Max and M-five Ultra. This is
the most likely hardware announcement. The M-five Ultra would be
Apple's first Ultra chip since the M-three generation, featuring up
to an eighty-core G-P-U, Thunderbolt five, and up to ninety-six
gigabytes of unified memory. For creative professionals and A-I developers
running local models, this is the machine to watch. Mac
mini with M-five and M-five Pro. A spec bump that
would bring the full desktop lineup to the M-five generation.
i-Mac with M-five. Rumored to include new color options alongside
the chip upgrade. And the entry-level iPad with an A-eighteen
chip, bringing Apple Intelligence capability to the cheapest iPad in
the lineup. Now, the HomePad question. Apple's rumored smart home
display is the wildcard. Reports describe a seven-inch square touchscreen
device with an A-eighteen chip, a TrueDepth camera with multi-user
facial recognition, wall-mount and dock options, and deep HomeKit integration.
Just two days ago, The Apple Post reported that the
device is, quote, ready to ship. But here's the catch:
multiple sources report that the HomePad has been repeatedly delayed
because Apple wants it to launch alongside the more capable
version of Siri. If the chatbot Siri isn't ready until
i-O-S twenty-seven ships in September, the HomePad likely gets a
preview at W-W-D-C but doesn't actually go on sale until
fall. Expected price: around three hundred and fifty dollars. Let
me run through the confidence tiers quickly. Confirmed: i-O-S twenty-seven,
mac-O-S twenty-seven, and the rest of the twenty-seven series will
be previewed. That's from Apple's press release. Very high confidence:
Gemini-powered Siri improvements, sourced from the Apple-Google joint statement and
Bloomberg. Also very high: i-O-S twenty-seven as a Snow Leopard
stability release, per Mark Gurman. High confidence: third-party A-I Extensions
for Siri, Core A-I framework replacing Core M-L, the Siri
chatbot interface debut, and Mac Studio with M-five Max and
Ultra. Medium confidence: foldable iPhone software features, the HomePad preview,
and the Liquid Glass adjustment slider. Lower confidence: A-I-powered Calendar
app and a Siri visual redesign. So, what am I
actually watching? Beyond the feature checklist, there are three meta-questions
that will determine whether W-W-D-C twenty twenty-six is a pivotal
moment or just another Tuesday in Cupertino. First: does chatbot
Siri actually feel competitive? Apple has spent over a billion
dollars on the Gemini partnership and years of engineering. If
the demo on June eighth shows a Siri that can
hold a genuine conversation, search the web intelligently, remember context,
and act across apps — if it feels like it
belongs in the same conversation as ChatGPT and Claude —
that changes Apple's A-I story completely. If it feels like
a skin on top of Google's A-P-I with the usual
Siri jank, that's a much bigger problem than any single
feature miss. Second: how open is the Extensions system? The
idea of routing Siri queries to third-party A-I providers is
genuinely exciting. But the devil is in the implementation. Does
Extensions mean deep integration where Claude or Gemini can access
your on-device context? Or does it mean a glorified web
view that opens when Siri gives up? The difference between
those two outcomes is the difference between Apple becoming the
A-I platform and Apple being a gatekeeper that A-I companies
have to work around. Third: is Core A-I a real
framework or a rebrand? Apple has a mixed history with
developer frameworks. Some, like SwiftUI, genuinely changed how people build
apps. Others, like SiriKit, launched with fanfare and quietly stagnated.
Core A-I needs to be in the first category. If
it ships with real third-party model support and sensible A-P-Is,
it could make every i-O-S app an A-I app within
a year. Sixty-four days out. I'll be updating this analysis
as new information surfaces — and I'll be glued to
the keynote livestream on June eighth. This is the year
Apple has to prove its A-I strategy is real. No
more coming later this year. The clock is running. That's
the W-W-D-C twenty twenty-six preview deep dive. Full post and
sources at jacob brooke ninety-five dot github dot i-o slash
jacobs research journal. Thanks for listening.